	symmetry groups and symmetric groups

Generally speaking, a symmetry, with respect to some object, is a transformation under which the object is invariant. The motivating example to keep in mind here is that of a geometric object, with spatial transformations that leave the object in a state equivalent to its initial position (note that this is a stronger sense of equivalence than congruence, as the transformed shape is required to be in the same relative "position" as how is started). Clearly, this idea is deeply related to the intuitive aesthetic idea of visual symmetry in shapes and patterns, often a metaphor for more figurative symmetry as a form of abstract balance.

A symmetry group (relative to some object), then, is simply the group of symmetries of that object under function composition. The idea of a symmetry group is very general, but immediately a very well studied, almost archetypal group comes to mind - the dihedral group, D_n, informally described as the group of rotations and reflections of a regular n-gon. More formally, a dihedral group is the group of symmetries of a regular polygon, and thus dihedral groups are always symmetry groups. Symmetric groups, on the other hand, are a seemingly unrelated concept whose definition carries a much different "flavor" than that of symmetry groups (it's more combinatorial in nature, rather than structural). The symmetric group S_n is the group of permutations of n symbols under function composition, or equivalently the set of bijections on a set with n elements.

However, straight from the definitions it's apparent that there's a thread of connection between symmetric groups and symmetry groups, in particular the dihedral group. This is that if we simply label the vertices of a regular n-gon, a symmetry (ie a rotation or reflection) of the n-gon also happens to be a bijection on the n vertices, since for instance a rotation maps each vertex to the one next to it in a modular fashion, whereas a reflection maps each vertex to the one opposite it relative to some bisecting line through two opposite vertices. This is strengthened by the well known fact that S_3, the symmetric group on 3 symbols, and D_3, the group of symmetries on an equilateral triangle, are isomorphic. This fact is actually a special case of a deeper relationship, and to understand this relationship we need to consider what it is about the equilateral triangle which forces its symmetric, distance preserving transformations to behave precisely like a unique bijection of 3 elements. The dual perspective here, on the other hand, is the consider how we can geometrically represent a bijection of n elements as a geometric transformation. The intuition behind answering both these questions is that the triangle is, in some sense, the "most symmetric" (the word "symmetric" is used here in its informal vernacular denotation) two-dimensional shape, for two reasons: (1) the triangle is composed of three points, which is precisely the minimum number of points needed to determine the plane in which the shape is embedded; any more points would be redundant and could be "broken down" by the other three points, and hence the three vertices of a triangle remain "linearly independent"; (2) the distances between the points are all identical. Intuitively, the first reason is a kind of positional symmetry that prevents us from distinguishing any of the points in terms of their relation to the other points (since the points are linearly independent), while the second reason is a form of distance symmetry that prevents us from distinguishing points by their distances to each other. To offer some more intuition towards the first point - if we had more than three points in the plane, such as in a square, then because the extraneous points are in the plane determined by the first three points, the group of reflections and rotations leaves many bijections (in this case on a set with four elements) unaccounted for (this is why D_4 is smaller than S_4).

These properties allow us to represent an arbitrary rearrangement (ie bijection or permutation) of 3 objects as some rotation or reflection of the triangle whose vertices are the objects. More generally, the symmetric group S_n is isomorphic to the dihedral group of the n-dimensional simplex. The two properties of the triangle we singled out above do generalize in fact, and are made mathematically precise in the definition of a simplex. Informally, an n-dimensional simplex is an n-dimensional generalization of a triangle and can be recursively constructed by taking an (n - 1)-dimensional simplex and adding in another point equidistant to all the rest (or equivalently taking (n + 1) simplexes and gluring them together). However, the salient mathematical property of the n-dimensional simplex is that it's the convex hull of its (n + 1) vertices. Recall that the convex hull of a set of points is the smallest convex set containing those points, and that a convex set is a set containing every line segment between two of its points. Convex sets, by their nature, are geometrically sets that don't cave in on themselves, but this restriction is applied minimally so, just so much as to ensure that it's met. The convex hull of a set of points is the "flattest", most regular possible set satisfying this restriction for a given set of points; this intuition endows simplexes with a precise sort of mathematical symmetry.