	topological spaces

Topological spaces are the central to many fields of mathematics, and are the primary object of study in topology. They underlie many foundational concepts in functional analysis, measure theory, harmonic analysis, and many other sub-fields of analysis. Indeed, the very essence of a topological space seeks to abstract and study the pivotal concepts that form the bedrock of modern mathematical analysis. Analysis began with the study of the real numbers, which historically were among the first mathematical objects, having been constructed from the countable, discrete rationals, to have properties akin to a smooth continuum, in contrast to the more solid, granular structure of the integers and rationals. Studying the essential ideas and concepts underlying these properties of smoothness in a continuum leads us to the familiar notions of connectedness, continuity, and many more fundamental analytic ideas which are based on the instrumental idea of a limit. The idea of a limit is crucial to analysis, and arguably is the core object of study for the entire domain; it's a way to rigorously formalize the idea of an infinite, both internally in structure and externally in length and magnitude, smooth continuum by first codifying the idea of getting arbitrarily close to something, and leveraging this idea to form a continuum as a space with points seamlessly connected to their neighbors by being arbitrarily close, thereby leaving no gaps, holes, or tears in the fabric of the space. This is the idea behind defining the reals as the completion of the rationals.

Topological spaces seek to abstract and generalize the notion of a limit, and the formative informal ideas of "arbitrarily close", without necessitating a precise definition of "close", "near", or even distance. Even upon generalizing the real numbers to metric spaces, which encompass the complex numbers, vector spaces, and many more analytic structures, a distance metric is necessary to formalize what we mean by "close". Topological spaces are the most general spaces which retain precise, well behaved notions of continuity, connectedness, convergence, and more. Metric spaces are a special case of topological spaces.

Having motivated topological spaces, let's now turn to their definition. The formal definition is as follows.

	A topological space is a set X and a set tau of subsets of X, satisfying the following axioms:
		1. The empty set and X are both in tau.
		2. The intersection of finitely many members of tau is in tau.
		3. The union of arbitrarily many members of tau is in tau.

The subsets in tau are known as open sets, and tau is known as a topology on X. Thus, the same set can have multiple topologies on it, depending on which subsets we choose to call open. Before we begin unpacking this definition, note the following. A recurring pattern in mathematics is to define objects in the most minimalist, elegant, compact, cleanest, logically simplest way possible, rather than in the way that lends itself best to the motivation behind the definition or the intuitive mental picture one had when defining it. As we touched on above, topological spaces are very general, abstract spaces meant to represent generalizations of certain essential analytic concepts. It just so happens that (1) a proper generalization of the idea of open sets in metric spaces (recall that in a metric space an open set is a set for which every point has a neighborhood (a ball of some radius centered at the point) completely in the set) to spaces beyond distance turns out to generate all the other topological properties we want for free, and (2) this proper generalization of open sets happens to be composed of the above properties of open sets, which apparently are themselves sufficient to generate all the other relevant properties we need for the generalization to work. Indeed, it's common for those who study deeper and deeper into analysis from the metric space approach to notice that many of the key ideas - limit points, closed sets, dense sets, perfect sets, compactness, and many more - can actually be defined using open sets, and don't depend explicitly on a distance function.

It's not completely surprising that open sets are the object we choose to use as our conceptual basis in defining topological spaces. After all, upon inspection it appears that the idea of an open set (in the context of a metric space) does in fact encode many of the analytic properties we seek to generalize beyond distance. By forcing every point to have a neighborhood completely submerged in the set, we guarantee that for every point in the set, there are infinitely many points in the set that can get arbitrarily close to it; the fact that this is true for every point in the set is what, intuitively, imposes a kind of seamless, flowing, smooth structure onto the fabric of the open set. These are the very intuitive properties that inspired analysis to begin with, and underly the analytic notions we seek to generalize in our definition of a topological space.

The way we want to use open sets is as a mechanism for making the idea of "arbitrarily close" precise, without using a distance metric. The core idea here is that in a topological space, two points are near if there's an open set that contains both of them, whereas two points are far if there are distinct open sets containing the two. Arbitrarily close points, then, are points which are always in some open set together; it's impossible to distinguish the points using open sets and the operation of containment, and every open set containing one of the points must also contain the other. Given some fixed point x, we can think of another point p_1 being closer to it than some third point p_2 if the open set containing x and p_2 also contains the open set with x and p_1 in it (but the converse isn't true). We can now visualize a sequence of points approaching some point (meant to serve informally as the limit) as a sequence of points where as we move an index forward in the sequence, points after the index are contained in smaller and smaller open sets, where in this context "smaller" means "contained in" (ie the order relation on open sets here is the subset operation). Moreover, much of the epsilon-delta approach to analysis makes use of the idea of taking a point, perturbing it in some tiny, perhaps infinitesimal, way, and considering what properties remain invariant. This idea is so prominent because the fact that we can make these tiny, arbitrarily small, or even infinitesimal perturbations is what gives the space a smooth structure at all. Open sets lend themselves naturally to codifying this idea as well, without any epsilons or deltas, if we just imagine a perturbation of a point to be another point contained in a tiny open set surrounding the former point. This is the motivating intuition for the open set definition of function continuity.

This is also why we can have multiple topologies on the same set of points. If we use open sets together with the containment operation as our intuitive heuristic for nearness of points, then demarcating different sets as open corresponds to rearranging or reordering the relative structure of the points. Given a set of points, such as the real numbers, it's tempting to associate our instinctive, gut visualization of a standard number line with the set, but of course the set on its own is simply that - a collection of objects with no imposed relationship between the objects at all. Imposing a topology on the set is when we actually arrange or order the points into a strict structure which induces relationships between points on it. Note, however, that this imposed structure is only powerful enough to impose certain general topological properties (such as continuity), but doesn't have powerful or strong enough axioms to tell us enough about a space to distinguish other analytic properties (such as spaces that are (continuous) deformations of each other, which are topologically equivalent). Incidentally, there are multiple topologies on the real numbers; the standard topology (where open sets are balls under the Euclidean distance metric) is the one we're used to, which gives us one-dimensional Euclidean space, but another example is the topology where points are arranged as
	..., -1/3, -2/1, -1/2, -1, 0, 1, 1/2, 2/1, 1/3, 3/1, ...
This is a valid topology, and in fact can be made into a metric space with a distance function assigning the number of places separating two poitns in the above configuration. The discrete topology, where every subset of the space is an open set, is the finest possible topology, and implies that every point has some open set (in particular, the singleton containing the point is a trivial example) containing only it and no other points; the nature of such a space is that no two points are arbitrarily close, and thus the space doesn't have any kind of smooth structure at all - it's discrete, as implied from the name.

This explains why we use open sets in our definition, but not why the generalization of open sets from metric spaces to a metric-free environment involves precisely the three axioms we used in our definition. The empty set and the whole space are the trivial, degenerate examples of an open set, in any context, and so we include them here. Necessitating that the whole space be open can be thought of as including the assumption that the entire space has the smooth, flowing structure we alluded to above, while necessitating that the empty set be open can be thought of as just satisfying a vacuous truth that a set with nothing in it vacuously has the smooth, flowing structure we're looking for. Motivating finite intersection is also easy enough. Consider two open sets, and a point x in their intersection. Any other point in the intersection is, by definition, "near" x, in terms of both open sets, and so it ought to be "near" x in terms of an open set strictly smaller than either original set. This applies to every point in the intersection, so it makes sense that we'd want the whole intersection to be an open set of its own. Finite intersection closure follows inductively, but extending this to the intersection of countably many open sets introduces some problems, since this enables us to create some quite pathological sets, and more often than not in order to maintain our original notions of a topological space under arbitrary intersection we're forced to simly take the entire power set of the space as open sets. To avoid this, we simply relinquish the requirement of closure under arbitrary intersection. Closure under arbitrary union however, the third property, is the axiom where our intuitive notions of topology come from. Clearly, the union of two open sets ought to be open, since points in either open set are "near" any fixed point in the union, and remain "near" in the union. Further, allowing us to build open sets by taking the union of arbitrarily many, perhaps uncountably many, open sets allows us to consider open sets defined with the idea of a limiting process, without ever having to define limits in the conventional epsilon-delta or distance metric methodology. This is because, for example, if we have an ascending chain of open sets (so each open set contains the last in the sequence of open sets), their union is an open set not specified in the sequence, but rather is, in some sense, the "limit" of the sequence of open sets. This also allows us to work with limits of sequences of points, by considering open sets about those points. The fact that this sequence can be of uncountable granularity, and not merely countable (which, unfortunately, remains discrete) is how we make limits continuous, and give the space a continuous, smooth nature.

It can now be seen that metric spaces are a special case of topological spaces - they define open sets using balls under a distance function. Many topologies can induce a metric, if there exists a distance function whose induced open sets exactly match those of the topology, but not all topological spaces are metrizable. This is one reason it can be necessary to study this more general context; another is that many spaces are very different as metric spaces, but similar intuitively and topologically (eg the complex numbers and the extended complex numbers).

Building on our intuition of using open sets to define a notion of nearness, we can now try to classify different topological spaces based on the "nearness structure" of their points. The following are known as the separation axioms, and are hierarchical (so spaces satisfying an axiom also satisfy all previous axioms) conditions spaces can satisfy, each imposing a stronger and stronger definition of nearness and smoothness on the space.
	T0. Kolgomorov space: All points are topologically distinguishable, ie for every pair of points in the space, at least one is in an open set not containing the other.
	T1. Frechet space: For every pair of distinct points, both have containing open sets not containing the other.
	T2. (Completely) Hausdorff space: For every pair of distinct points, both have disjoint containing open sets.
	T2.5. Urysohn space: Every pair of distinct points can be separated by closed (defined as a set whose complement is open) neighborhoods.
		-In this context, to be "separated" by sets means for each point to belong to a respective set, where each set is disjoint from the closure of the other. Intuitively, this indicates that not only are the enclosing neighborhoods disjoint (which guarantees some degree of separation in the space, by prohibiting spaces where points are infinitely close), and hence are not overlapping, but also that they're not touching or approaching each other either.
	T3. Regular (Hausdorff) space: For every closed subset of the space and point in the space (but not in the subset) the subset and point have disjoint containing open sets.
	T3.5. Tychonoff space: For every closed subset of the space and point in the space (but not in the subset) the subset and point can be separated by a continuous function.
		-In this context, to be "separated" by a continuous function means there exists a continuous function f from X to the real numbers for which f maps the subset to 1 and the point to 0. The values 0 and 1 here are arbitrary, so long as they're distinct, and are merely convenient placeholder choices. The essence of this definition is that the point is separated enough from the set that one can smoothly, continuously distinguish the two; if such a separating function did not exist, then it would be possible for the point to be arbitrarily close to the set.
	T4. Normal (Hausdorff) space: Every two disjoint closed sets have disjoint open neighborhoods. This is known as being separated by neighborhoods.
	T5. Completely normal Hausdorff space: A T2 space for which every pair of separated sets can be separated by neighborhoods.
	T6. Perfectly normal Hausdorff space: A T2 space for which every pair of disjoint closed sets can be precisely separated by a continuous function.
		-In this context, to be "precisely separated" means there exists a continuous function which maps one set, and only that set, to 0 and the other set, and only that set, to 1.